mmonucmon. ix'

end, he thought, of all thesestudies should be to establish
some clear grounds of human action.

10. It followed naturally from this that Cicero found the
greatest pleasure in ethieal studies; and to these he has de-
voted two of his larger works. The De Finibus, as was re-

· marked above, contains a discussion of the idea of the summum

honum, and the Epicurean, Stoic, and Peripatetic doctrines are
examined at length.- The first of these is absolutely rejected 3¹
the doctrine that pleasure is the highest end of human action
seems to the author absurd and utterly destructive of all
morality.v No clearldecision, however, is reached in regard to
the othersss the' Stoic doctrine that ⁴virtue is the only good
seems to him more sublime, but he fears that it is an impossi-
ble one in Praetice3² at the same time, if we admit with the

¹Peripatetics that anything else is good in itsclf, hc fears that

the foundation of morality may be less secure.⁸ The differ·
enee in· the-end is very‘ slight, one of words rather than of
substance, he says; whether virtue is the only good, or is good
beyond> comparison with other things, is 'of no practical im-
portance.⁴ One sees that, so long as the discussion is theo-
retical, he has no clear conviction.

11. In the. De Officiis the tone is in general quite different.
He chooses here the Stoic system as a basis, because it seems
to him (ΙΙΙ. 4, 20) more elevated in tone} and although claim-
ing at times the right of an Academic to change his opinions
and to select 'more probable doctrines, yet he nowhere shows
any doubt in reg-ard 'to the foundation of morality and the
absolute nature of the good. The treatment of the subject is
thoroughly practical, the points chosen for discussion such as
would interest his son and be useful to him in ordinary and in
public life. His large experience of the world and extensive
acquaintance with the political movements of the time lend an

especial interest to the work.
After a brief introduction a general division of the *subject

¹ De Fin. 1. ⁷, 23 ff.; 11. 34, 35. ’De Fin. IV. 9, 213 De Am.

v. 18. · ⁸Tnsq. Disp. v. 1. ⁴ De eff. 111. s, ιι.

‚Aa

